now the main UN agency set up to assist
Palestinian refugees unra is facing a
cash crisis unra has said it will run
out of money in the coming days after
major donor Nations suspended their
funding the freeze came after Israel
said that several unra workers were
involved in the October 7 Terror attacks
by Hamas now the agency's future is at
stake leaving long-term humanitarian aid
for Gaza in
doubt a lifelong for gazin or hamas's
partner in Terror this is a question
dogging the un's Palestinian Aid agency
and donor countries seem to have
answered it for themselves by holding
back
funds that puts more than a million
people at severe risk for decades the
agency has been a primary source of food
and medicine for gin unra was founded in
1949 to help Palestinians who fled or or
were expelled from their homes when
Israel was founded it originally had a
3-year mandate but has been renewed ever
since since there has been no political
solution to the conflict the agency's
operations have been especially vital
for gazin since Israel's 2007 blockade
of the
territory it also serves Palestinian
refugees in the occupied West Bank Syria
Lebanon and
Jordan but many in Israel take a
different View
this is Jerusalem's Deputy Mayor calling
get out get out at a small farri protest
people this demonstration want the
agency to leave the region
entirely Israel has claimed that 12 unra
workers helped plan the October 7 Terror
attacks and that many agency workers are
affiliated with Hamas or other Terror
groups in Gaza prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu says SE sees no future for the
agency the Civil administration of Gaza
won't be able to be carried out by those
who support or fund
Terror this means too that we will have
to replace onra the UN has pushed back
firing the 12 workers in question and
saying they don't represent the
agency that we are doing everything
possible to make sure that un is an
organization that not only is effective
necessary but it is also able to defend
itself against infiltrations that can
put into question its neutrality a US
intelligence assessment of Israel's
claims said some of the accusations were
credible though they could not be
independently verified but also cast out
on claims of wider links to militant
groups it's unclear if the report will
change the stance of donor countries or
what could take unrra's place
if Aid dries up it will be ordinary Gins
who
suffer let's get more on this now from
Jonathan fer he's a spokesman for unra
currently in Aman Jordan and joins us
from there Jonathan uh unra says it's at
Breaking Point as a result of major
donors holding back payments its
operations could be severely disrupted
from March onwards what concrete effect
will that have on the situation in
Gaza well thank you very much for for
having me on today um the immediate
effects in Gaza of course uh I simply
going to compound the nature of the the
catastrophe that we're already seeing uh
we're dealing with an aid operation for
two million people in Gaza we're feeding
1.1 million people and we're Sheltering
over 1 million so if you take the
funding away from the aid operations in
Gaza then that um is going to accelerate
the nature of the humanitarian crisis
we're already seeing risks of epidemics
um we're seeing pockets of famine
notably in the north which has been
inaccessible for Aid operations since
the end of January so that's the picture
in Gaza now what's the agency doing to
give assurances it's carrying out due
diligence and has strengthened its
oversight regarding
neutrality first of all I want to stress
um when we're talking about accusations
against 12 members of staff and onra has
has has been absolutely categorical in
our condemnation of the 7th of October
attacks on Israel um but 12 out of
30,000 people working in um for unra
across the region that's
0.04% so that's one point uh we should
not tarnish an entire agency uh based on
on the accusations against um 12 uh
individuals um but what we are doing and
this was concretely stressed in the in
in the previous report um was we have
two things one is an independent
investigation being run by the un's top
investigative Authority that's the
office of internal oversight Services um
and then it's separate to that and in
fact this was announced before these
accusations against the 12 staff emerged
we also have an independent review of
unra going on um to verify the
robustness of our um investigative and
sanctioning procedures when there are
breaches of neutrality because we always
take allegations seriously as an agency
and we always have done now some Israeli
officials say that Palestinians see unra
less as an aid provider but more as a a
key validator of their Palestinian
identity in a never- ending war against
Israel uh what's your response to
that well we've been in existence for 75
years but that's not on us um onor was
created in response to a refugee crisis
which was the Palestine Refugee crisis
it was created by the United Nations in
the very early days of the UN um the
fact that we're still here all these
years later is um basically symbolic of
a of a political failure by the
International Community to solve uh one
of the most protracted Refugee crisis in
in modern history um we are a
humanitarian organization we're not a
political organization um but it's not
about validating um a cause we we are a
humanitarian organization and I should
stress also that there are un
resolutions which um which do do
underscore the fact that refugees
Palestine refugees like any other
refugees have a right to adjust and
Lasting solution to their plight now the
former unra Chief Matias schal says uh
that cooperation with Hamas at a certain
level uh was unavailable can you
understand that it's hard for many
people to accept that an aid agency
might be working with an authority that
represents a terror
organization look the the the UN Works
around the world in complex environments
in some of those environments uh they
may be under the control of de facto
authorities or armed groups but the
point is uh as humanitarian
organizations we have to work with what
we have um we don't have political
contacts um with with Hamas as an
organization but what kind of contct
ground do you have
then well practical in the sense of
being able to to actually function on
the ground um this is this is not just
something that we that happens in Gaza
this is something where any any un
entity um any un Aid agency is in
operation that could be anywhere around
the world but it's to ensure that Aid
actually gets to the people who need it
um and we we are quite exceptional in
that we do uh deal with the aid
operations from a to zed so we have a
direct delivery policy so there's not
middlemen or anything like that involved
so the the the Practical um aspects of
this are very light touch in terms of
contact Jonathan Fowler there spokesman
for unra thank you very
much thank you
Matias schala is a senior un advisor
based in Addis Ababa he's also a former
director of unwa in Gaza welcome to DW
so when is the organization projected to
run out of money and what will that look
like in my understanding we are a couple
of weeks away so in the course of March
from onra running out of money for Gaza
itself this would have devastating
consequences our colleagues on the
ground are telling us that at least half
a million people are facing severe um
hunger famine and unra is by far the
biggest agency that can help prevent
that unra as you know is also working in
four other places Syria Lebanon Jordan
and the West Bank and if it runs out of
money essential services like education
schools and Primary Health Care would
stop there too and it can be in no one's
interest that children for example
cannot go to school so help us
understand where the organization then
is financially has all financial aid
stopped or are you just looking at a
substantial I say just are you looking
at a substantial reduction in
income my understanding is that initial
payments were made this year which have
kept the organization going up to now
and the major donors have said that they
will wait with further payments until
the allegations are clarified through
the invest vestigation so again in my
understanding indeed the situation is
extremely critical and in the course of
March if further payments are not made
it may have to stop its essential
services so given those Israeli
allegations about a supposed Hamas
infiltration of unua how does the
organization uh satisfy donor countries
their funds and Aid are not being
misused well up to 7 October I think
donors were convinced that we had robust
management monitoring and disciplinary
measures in place during my time in Gaza
of almost four years I I sacked eight
employees one of whom we were able to
prove that he was an active member of of
the alasan brigades of amas the others
were other issues so I in my experience
with the donors and I believe it's the
same for my successors uh in Gaza and
elsewhere was that Donas trusted our
systems that we had put up to deal with
attempts by Hamas to influence the
organization and there are also Israeli
accusations that Palestinians see unua
less as an aid provider and more as a
sort of reinforcement of the Palestinian
uh struggle how would you respond to
those
claims well I I think there is indeed a
Palestinian struggle which has little to
do with UNS self the Palestinian
struggle is one for
self-determination and to get a state a
country a place they can call home like
you and I like Israelis themselves so
unra was established with a time limit
in fact it was 70 years plus ago set up
for three years to provide services
until the promised Palestinian state
would be established and nothing has
changed there unra is not a political
organization to to find a just solution
unra is providing Services until the
United Nations the general assembly the
member states find a solution that is
accepted by all sides including the
Palestinians and and since October 7 has
happened we've seen repeated allegations
uh from uh uh Israel that um things like
uh petrol uh diesel um uh food goes
missing that is provided by unua goes to
Hamas now in your experience of having
dealt with this does that happen and how
do you go about rooting it
out listen in in my time there was no
deviation of Aid to M Hamas we had
robust systems in place including
systems that involved the Israelis we
could bring nothing into Gaza uh through
Israel that was not approved by them and
that required detailed negotiation on
whether for example the volume the
amount of cement we were trying to bring
in was the right amount to build a
school and you know people could come
ambassadors visited us including the
German ambassador they could see for
themselves that the aid provided was
translated either into buildings like
schools or health centers or into the
payment of salaries for almost 9,000
teachers teaching in our at my time 278
schools so in my time and I believe it's
been the same since there has been no
deviation of Aid we have to of course
understand right now there is a terrible
war and unra has lost control over many
of its installations because of the war
the Israelis asked them to move to the
south of the Gaza Strip so of course the
robust monitoring systems are severely
undermined in this situation of active
conflict okay thank you for talking us
through that so clearly Matias schala
senior un advisor and former unor
director in Gaza thank you
again thank
you well it's not just Palestinians in
Gaza who fear being cut off if unra runs
out of funds the agency also provides
assistance in host countries like
Lebanon which is home to more than a
quarter of a million refugees our
correspondent Muhammad chetra reports
from
[Music]
Beirut this is what life looks like in
the chatila refugee camp of
beut it is one of 12 Palestine refugee
camps across
Lebanon they all depend on one
organization to survive
unwa NOA is 82 she suffers from
hypertension and diabetes un's Clinic is
the only Health Care Facility she can
afford it has been providing her
medicine for the past 12 years so the
new of un's unprecedented cash crisis is
troubling
[Music]
her how will I get the
medicine death would be better for me I
have no support but
court another crucial service provided
by unwa garbage
collection the camp will sink in trash
in less than 24 hours if unwa does not
collect the garbage one official tells
us good morning
for children unoa schools offer options
in an environment full of
danger without unra schools our children
will end up on the streets or in coffee
shops probably armed they would use
drugs especially since drug dealers are
all over the place and it would be much
easier to recruit these children off the
streets the future of those cool
children depends on un so does the
health of those at the clinic it is not
just that unoa also pays rent and
provides Essentials like water and
electricity it is effectively the state
in places like this without the services
that unoa currently provides a quarter
million Palestinians across Lebanon
would be utterly destitute and
increasingly
desperate I can't describe how people
will react if unra stops there will be
riots and violent protests it's not
going to be easy unwa is struggling to
keep keep a lid on feelings of
frustration they're very very worried
there's fear there's
anxiety and it Fosters and deepens a
sense of hopelessness that's already
present so we're now starting to see
refugees show up in our offices and
yelling at our staff in in great
frustration and and
despair and uh threatening to to come
back unwa has no mandate to secure
Palestinian refugees return to what used
to be their homes but most Palestinians
refuse to separate its Service delivery
from the right for return the two issues
are deeply intertwined in the minds of
the
refugees dissolving unra would end the
Palestinian cause and the right for
return but also an end to all the social
educational and medical services that it
provides in crisis hit Lebanon and near
the beginning of the month of Ramadan
refugees needs for unwa services is more
critical than
ever